restore: restore crd after accidental deletion (#170)
rook/kubectl-rook-ceph: docs/crd.md

# Restoring Deleted CRs

When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.

While the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

> [!NOTE]

> > If there are multiple deleted resources in the cluster and no specific resource is mentioned, in that case the first resource will be restored and in order to restore all resources we need to re-run the command.

Author: Yes, we could loop through all the resources but IMO it's better to restore one resource at a time. It's better for monitoring and debugging if something goes wrong. Also, users may get overwhelmed with all the log messages.

Also, we later decide to restore all the resources at once. In that case, it will be better if we do so after Javier's PR since he is adding the code to list resources from dynamic API, it will help in looping over the resource. And currently we are getting the resource from the command and then reading it as a string.

> > If there are multiple deleted resources in the cluster and no specific resource is mentioned, in that case the first resource will be restored and in order to restore all resources we need to re-run the command.

Reviewer: Ok we can do this for now, it's really a corner case anyway.

> # Restore the CRD stuck in delete mode

Reviewer: Keep the L1 header short
```suggestion
# Restoring Deleted CRs
```

> When the Rook CRDs are deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data appears present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to allow the resources to be deleted since the operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CRs until the underlying data is deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.
```

> While it is good that the CRs will not be deleted and the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, below command will allow you to restore the CRs to their prior state without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

Reviewer: The state will show as "Terminating", right?
```suggestion
While it is good that the CRs will not be deleted and the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Terminating state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.
```

Author: Last I remember it was saying `Deleting ....`, I'll confirm again and update

> 

Reviewer: How about a separate section for the main syntax, and then for the example?
```
## Restore Command

[Show/describe the general syntax]

## CephCluster Restore Example

Sentence that describes the cluster example below...
```

```bash

> kubectl rook-ceph restore cephcluster [cephCRDName]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl rook-ceph restore cephcluster [cephClusterName]
```

> Warning: rook version 'rook: v1.12.0-alpha.0.241.ga64f9bccf' is running a pre-release version of Rook.

Reviewer: In the example output, let's pretend it's not pre-release :)
```suggestion
```

# Restoring Deleted CRs

When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.

While the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

## Restore Command

```bash
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted <CRD> [CRName]

> # `restore-deleted`: is the command to restore the deleted CR

Reviewer: No need to describe this command here, it was already described above
```suggestion
```

> # `<CRD>`: the CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.

Reviewer: Put these argument descriptions in bullets instead of inside the code block. The code block is generally just used for commands and their output. Also, I'd suggest moving these argument descriptions above the command example (before line 10)
```suggestion
- `<CRD>`: the CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.
```

# `[CRName]`: is the name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple instances under the same CRD. For example, if there are multiple CephFilesystems stuck in deleting state, a specific filesystem can be restored: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.
```

## CephCluster Restore Example

```bash
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted cephcluster [cephClusterName]

Info: Detecting which ceph crd resources to restore

> Info: Restoring crd cephcluster name my-cluster

Reviewer: After we detect which resource(s) to restore, I'm wondering if we should pause and confirm. There is some risk to this operation, so it felt very sudden to continue without any prompt. For example, prompt:
 "The resource %s was found deleted. Do you want to restore it? yes | no". Only if they type `y` or `yes` then we would continue. It's not super risky so we don't need a longer confirmation string, but something simple like this seems best. Thoughts?

Author: that's a good point and I agree this is a kind of destructive command better confirmed by user input.

And `yes` is better than just `y` for input.

# Restoring Deleted CRs

When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.

> While it is good that the CRs will not be deleted and the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.
```

## Restore Command

```bash

> kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted <CRDName> [CRName]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted <CRD> [CRName]
```

# `restore-deleted`: is the command to restore the deleted CR

> # `<CRDName>`: the CRD deleting you want to restore. Example: cephcluster, cephfilesystem, cephblockpool and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `<CRD>`: the CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.
```

> # `[CRName]`: is the name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple CRs under the same CRD. Example let's say you multiple cephfilesystem stuck in deleting state in your cluster named `filesystem-1`, `filesystem-2` and you want to restore to store only `filesystem-2`. In this case you can pass the name of the specifc CR, like this: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.

Reviewer: Shorter can be more concise to understand.
```suggestion
# `[CRName]`: is the name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple instances under the same CRD. For example, if there are multiple CephFilesystems stuck in deleting state, a specific filesystem can be restored: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.
```

# Restoring Deleted CRs

When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.

While the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

> ## Restore Command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## restore-deleted Command
```

The `restore-deleted` command has one required and one optional parameter:

> - `<CRD>`: the CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.

Reviewer: It's not a sentence, but it seems better capitalized.
```suggestion
- `<CRD>`: The CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.
```

> - `[CRName]`: is the name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple instances under the same CRD. For example, if there are multiple CephFilesystems stuck in deleting state, a specific filesystem can be restored: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[CRName]`: The name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple instances under the same CRD. For example, if there are multiple CephFilesystems stuck in deleting state, a specific filesystem can be restored: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.
```

```bash
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted <CRD> [CRName]
```

## CephCluster Restore Example

```bash

> kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted cephcluster [cephClusterName]

Reviewer: For the example, let's show the command exactly as executed
```suggestion
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted cephcluster
```

Info: Detecting which resources to restore for crd "cephcluster"
Info: Restoring CR my-cluster
Warning: The resource my-cluster was found deleted. Do you want to restore it? yes | no

yes
Info: proceeding with restoring deleting cr
Info: Scaling down the operator to 0
Info: Backing up kubernetes and crd resources
Info: Backed up crd cephcluster/my-cluster in file cephcluster-my-cluster.yaml
Info: Deleting validating webhook rook-ceph-webhook if present
Info: Fetching the UID for cephcluster/my-cluster
Info: Successfully fetched uid 9575a4c9-7d0f-4b98-93d5-0b7dab7efeb4 from cephcluster/my-cluster
Info: Removing ownerreferences from resources with matching uid 9575a4c9-7d0f-4b98-93d5-0b7dab7efeb4
Info: Removing owner references for secret cluster-peer-token-my-cluster
Info: Removed ownerReference for Secret: cluster-peer-token-my-cluster

Info: Removing owner references for secret rook-ceph-admin-keyring
Info: Removed ownerReference for Secret: rook-ceph-admin-keyring

> ---

Reviewer: If these are to show removed text, I'd suggest changing to dots and only one line of them is needed. But perhaps for this example we don't need to remove any text since it's not terribly long for this command.
```suggestion
...
```

# Restoring Deleted CRs

When a Rook CR is deleted, the Rook operator will respond to the deletion event to attempt to clean up the cluster resources. If any data is still present in the cluster, Rook will refuse to delete the CR to ensure data is not lost. The operator will refuse to remove the finalizer on the CR until the underlying data is deleted.

While the underlying Ceph data and daemons continue to be available, the CRs will be stuck indefinitely in a Deleting state in which the operator will not continue to ensure cluster health. Upgrades will be blocked, further updates to the CRs are prevented, and so on. Since Kubernetes does not allow undeleting resources, the command below will allow repairing the CRs without even necessarily suffering cluster downtime.

## Restore Command

> 

Reviewer: An intro sentence for the section would be helpful, such as:
The `restore-deleted` command has one required and one optional parameter:

Author: added

- `<CRD>`: the CRD type that is to be restored, such as CephCluster, CephFilesystem, CephBlockPool and so on.
- `[CRName]`: is the name of the specific CR which you want to restore since there can be multiple instances under the same CRD. For example, if there are multiple CephFilesystems stuck in deleting state, a specific filesystem can be restored: `restore-deleted cephfilesystem filesystem-2`.

```bash
kubectl rook-ceph restore-deleted <CRD> [CRName]

> 

Reviewer: The next section has the example output. Seems like you can delete lines 14-43 and just have this section focus on the parameters and basic description.

Author: removed

Info: Detecting which resources to restore for crd "cephcluster"
Info: Restoring CR my-cluster
Warning: The resource my-cluster was found deleted. Do you want to restore it? yes | no

Info: skipped prompt since ROOK_PLUGIN_SKIP_PROMPTS=true
Info: Scaling down the operator to 0
Info: Backing up kubernetes and crd resources

> ---

Reviewer: Why are there so many separators? `---`

Reviewer: Ah, I would expect `...` to represent removing some lines

Author: updated
